[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
This is Lisa Garr.
And welcome to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
We are coming to you live
from Boulder, Colorado.
And since this a live
show, we encourage
you to interact with us
on Facebook and Twitter.
Some of you have
already started,
so keep those
postings coming in.
We'll answer your questions
throughout the show.
So if you've ever been
one of those persons
who has received a phone call
about the passing of a loved
one, or if you've ever been
at the bedside of someone who
has passed over,
this show is for you.
And this is the
conversation that
Dr. Raymond Moody has
dedicated his life to,
is helping people
in this situation.
Dr. Moody is the author of a
book called "Life After Life,"
which is in its 37th year.
Millions of people
have read his book.
And he also has a new book
out called "Paranormal:
My Life in the Pursuit
of the Afterlife."
Thank you so much for
joining me, Dr. Moody.
>>RAYMOND MOODY:
Thank you, Lisa.
I'm just delighted to be here.
And thanks also to our
viewers who are watching.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
A lot of people are
very, very curious
about this concept of life after
death, near-death experiences.
Is there life after death?
How did you come
to write the book
37 years ago about this concept?
>>MOODY: Well, I was
one of those kids who
just wasn't raised religious.
And when I went to the
University of Virginia
at the age of 18
to study astronomy,
actually-- but I'd been
interested in philosophy
in high school.
And literally in my first few
days as a first-year student
at the University
of Virginia in 1962,
reading Plato's "Republic" was
where I became aware of this.
Because Plato's
"Republic" is about
the question of
life after death.
And it culminates with
this amazing story
of a warrior who
was believed dead.
But during the funeral,
he spontaneously revived.
And he sat up.
And he talked to his friends
about leaving his body
and going through a passageway
into another world where
he saw his life reviewed.
And I was very impressed
with that story.
And I was absolutely
persuaded at age 18
by Plato's argument,
who said that this
is the most important
question of existence.
Then three years
later, still at UVA
as an undergraduate
philosophy student,
I heard about Dr. George
Ritchie, who was at that time
a professor of psychiatry at
the University of Virginia,
who some years before had had
this very experience in which
he had been pronounced
dead on two occasions, nine
minutes apart, and had this
phenomenal experience where--
listening to Doctor Ritchie
tell about this experience
was a life-changing
event in my life.
And to make a long story
short, since that time,
I've had the privilege,
as it really is,
of interviewing
literally thousands--
I'm not exaggerating--
thousands of people
from all over the world who
went to the brink of death
and who had this
amazing experience.
>>LISA: So how does this
information, all these people
that you've interviewed
about near-death experiences,
how does that help the person
who has lost a loved one?
>>MOODY: Well, doctors
all over the world
had studied these
near-death experiences.
And what we find
is that, for people
who haven't had
such an experience,
it really does seem to
be comforting to them
to hear these stories of people
who almost die and recover.
And also, I think
that for people
who are terminally ill,
that these stories are
very comforting.
Because generally what people
who almost die and recover
tell us was that, far from
being a bad experience,
it was in effect the
highlight of their life.
They say they enter into
an entirely different realm
of existence.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Yes.
I have been through one
of these experiences
where I was in a severe
accident and left my body
and went up over the scene
and saw and felt and heard
all of the feelings of
the people below me,
and watched my body and
watched all the people.
It was the most extraordinary
experience I've ever had.
And I remember it
clearly, so clearly.
I was far from unconscious.
I was more conscious
than I ever, ever was.
It was an expanded
consciousness.
>>MOODY: Yes.
Exactly right.
>>LISA: So we're going
to go through today some
of the classic characteristics
that Dr. Moody has
so eloquently put into
place for people like me
and anyone else who's had
an experience like this,
to be able to identify
with that experience that
was so mysterious to me
that I had no words for it--
I still struggle
to find words for--
and that's actually one
of the characteristics.
And we're going to go
through these in detail.
So if you've ever
been though this,
you have a way to
identify with this.
And also, if you
haven't been through it,
you understand a little
bit more about what
happens to people who go through
this, quote, tunnel of death.
We have a clip to show you that
kind of encapsulates what--
from a movie called
"Life After Life" that
was made after Dr.
Raymond Moody's book.
Let's take a look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The lightning came down the
phone line, entered my neck.
It went through my spine,
threw me up in air.
>>And I felt myself
pop out of the body.
Then I felt myself
float up to the ceiling.
And the doctor and the
nurse were in there.
And he was looking at me.
Said, "She's gone.
She's dead."
>>And I was taken to hospital.
Doctors did anything
they could to help me,
but I was declared dead.
>>I realized I
was out of my body
when I was suddenly
looking at this light.
>>Out of that stepped
the most amazing being
I have ever been
in the presence of.
>>It was just all-consuming
love, wonderful love.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Death is nothing more
or less than a doorway,
something you walk through.
>>(ECHOING) Death
does not exist.
Don't be afraid.
>>This was holographical view
of being inside of your life
and then being as a
viewer, participating
the play of theater.
>>He was asking me had I learned
to love my fellow human beings
the way that he totally
accepted and loved me.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So how many
people have come to you
since you've written the book?
How many thousands of
people have come to you
with these experiences?
>>MOODY: You know,
Lisa, literally, I
have no way of tracking it.
This is something I hear
numerous times a week.
>>LISA: A week.
Wow.
>>Yeah.
And literally thousands
of people since I
first heard Dr.
Ritchie speak in 1965.
>>LISA: That have come to you.
And I didn't even come to you.
I saw the-- you have a whole
posting on the internet
through your Life
After Life website.
And it shows the
characteristics,
which we're going
to go through today.
But it was so healing for me to
identify with that and to see--
And I wound up
taking your course
through my master's program.
And it was very,
very enlightening.
So let's go through some
of the characteristics.
>>MOODY: Yes.
>>LISA: What is
the typical, like--
this is general, of course.
This isn't the same
for everyone, right?
>>MOODY: That's right.
People go into this
more deeply the longer
they're close to death.
So that someone who has
an extended cardiac arrest
is more likely to tell
you this whole picture.
Whereas somebody, for example,
with only momentary cardiac
arrest will just tell you one
or two or three of these things.
But in the typical case
we've seen many times,
people will tell us that at this
point where their heart stops
beating, they actually
hear their doctor say,
oh my god, he's dead,
or words to that effect.
Which comes as a big
surprise to them,
because they say, as you
did, that paradoxically, I've
heard people say,
I've never felt
so alive as when I heard
my doctor say I was dead.
>>LISA: You can't say it.
Right.
>>MOODY: And people
say that they rise up.
They see their own
physical bodies down below.
They watch as the
doctors and nurses
are trying to resuscitate them.
But after a while on this,
it kind of dawns on them, oh,
that since I'm out of my
body, nobody can see me.
I try to talk.
Nobody can hear me.
>>LISA: It's a
sense of surrender.
>>MOODY: Yes.
Surrender.
And at this point,
they tell us they
enter into states
of consciousness
that, no matter how
articulate they may be
or how many languages
they may speak, they say
they simply have no
words to describe this,
that it lies beyond words.
But the way they
try to describe it,
they say they go through
a passageway, which
they may compare to
a tunnel or a tube.
And they say they come
out on the other side
of this passageway in an
incredibly brilliant light,
far brighter than anything that
we have seen while we're alive.
But it's not uncomfortable.
As a matter of
fact, the reverse.
They feel completely
comforted, at peace, joyful,
and pervaded by this amazing
love, far beyond the love
that we feel while we're here.
And in that light, they tell
us that relatives or friends
of theirs who have
already died seem
to be there almost as
a greeting committee,
to help them through
this transition.
>>LISA: In a peaceful way.
>>MOODY: Yes.
And they-- at some point
this whole environment kind
of disappears, and they
find themselves surrounded
by a full-color,
three-dimensional, holographic
panorama consisting in many
cases of every single thing
they've ever done.
It's right there
displayed before them.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>MOODY: And they say that
even though-- because language
is sequential-- that
when they tell this,
they have to tell it as
though it were a sequence.
That in the experiencing
of it, literally everything
is there at once.
>>LISA: Right.
It's non-linear.
>>MOODY: Yep.
And they say that in
this panorama, when
you see yourself
doing an action,
that you see yourself as
though you're another person.
But when that action has its
impact or its consequences,
you are embedded in
the consciousness
of those with whom
you've interacted.
And hence, if you see
yourself doing something
mean to somebody,
then in this review
you feel empathically
and directly the hurt
that you brought about
in that person's life.
Or if you see yourself
doing something loving,
then you feel the good feelings.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MOODY: At a certain
point, obviously,
people have to come back.
Some people say they have
no idea how they got back.
Just one moment they
were in this light,
then they were back on
the ER table or whatever.
>>LISA: The movie-- the
"Life After Life" movie
does a really good
job of showing
some interviews of people
who have been through this.
Let's take a look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Pretty much all
over the world,
we found this common pattern.
They tell us that at this
point where their doctor says
they are dead, that
they may actually
hear the physician
say, oh my, he's dead,
or we've lost her, or
something like that.
And they say that from
their perspective, actually,
they still feel very much alive.
Indeed their consciousness
is heightened.
And they tell us that they seem
to leave their physical bodies.
They say that they
float up, typically
right above the bed in the
operating room or the emergency
room.
And they look down.
And they can see their
own physical bodies
lying on the bed down below.
>>I was above my body.
I was floating.
And there were people around me.
Except I didn't realize that
that person there was me.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So Heather
from Facebook is
asking-- what's the difference
between when you leave
your body and when you're
just projecting or floating
above your body in
like a meditation?
What's the difference there?
>>MOODY: Well, that's a
great question, Heather.
And what we have here is
a continuum or a spectrum
rather than a
discrete difference.
And the experience
you're describing
there of leaving the body
occurs, as you're intimating,
not just in the case of somebody
who almost dies and recovers,
but other cases as well.
For example, you mentioned
the meditative state.
And also the out-of-body
experiences sometimes
occur to music performers
while they're on stage.
>>LISA: Oh, so
there's a difference
between a near-death experience
and an out-of-body experience.
>>MOODY: Well, I think, yes.
The out-of-body
experience is something
that occurs sometimes in
a near-death experience
and sometimes in other cases,
like performing great music.
Or astronomers occasionally
gazing through their telescopes
will have out-of-body
experiences.
And so it occurs
not just in the case
of a near-death experience,
but also in these other cases.
>>LISA: So now, can
these experiences
be replicated in any kind--
type of controlled situation,
a near-death experience?
>>MOODY: Well, I
think parts of it can.
I don't think that the entire
near-death experience can
be replicated yet,
but parts of it.
And there are different
ways, for example,
of inducing an
out-of-body state.
And another
circumstance in which
people without almost dying
can have these experiences
is at the bedside of
someone who does die.
It's very common, for
example, when somebody dies,
and the loved ones are standing
around as the person in the bed
dies, the bystanders themselves
may have all of these features
that we talk about as a
near-death experience,
including seeing the spirit
of the departing person
leave the body.
Or in many cases, the bystanders
will say that they themselves
feel they leave
their physical bodies
and accompany their dying loved
one part way toward this light.
Or the bystanders may
see the room fill up
with this beautiful light.
Or they may hear gorgeous music.
Or they say sometimes
that they perceive
the spirits of the
deceased person-- I
mean the spirits of
the deceased relatives
and friends of the dying person.
And I've had cases in which the
bystander actually empathically
co-lives the panoramic life
review of the person who
passes away.
>>LISA: That's what a
shared death experience is?
>>MOODY: Shared
death experience.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
There's actually a really good
part in the movie about that.
This is the Gaiam movie
"Life After Life."
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>There's a skeptical
part of me, too.
And I wonder sometimes
whether or not
this might just be
people's hallucinations
that they're going
through, or just
a natural shutting-down process
when the brain is dying.
>>I used to wonder about
that myself, Peter.
What has turned me around on
that issue is that so often
these patients are
able to give us
very correct descriptions
of what was going on
during the resuscitation
from a point of view
they couldn't have had
from that perspective
of that physical body
lying on the table.
For instance, my friend Kim, who
works at a medical university
out west, was
telling me that she
was involved in resuscitating
a young patient named Maria.
And Maria had been believed dead
but was successfully revived.
And when she came
back to consciousness,
my friend Kim happened to be
standing there by her bedside.
And Maria grabbed onto Kim and
said during the resuscitation,
when she was out
of her body, she
drifted outside of the hospital
entirely and saw an old shoe
on a ledge on a window outside
an upper floor of the hospital.
And Kim was actually
able to go there
and to verify that
the shoe was there
exactly as the
patient had specified.
>>Really.
>>And all of a sudden, aware
of people out in the hall.
The room had been
sealed off because he
was going to do
surgery in the room.
So I immediately went
out through the door.
Did not open it, just went out.
I was immediately on the
other side of it, in the hall.
But I go up to my daughter.
And I try to make her hear
me, "Kathy, go home and change
your clothes."
I couldn't make her hear
me, so I went to her dad.
I said, "Jud, take Kathy home.
Change her clothes.
She shouldn't be out like this."
While they were
in the hall there
and I was trying to send them
home, a brother of my husband's
came up.
And he was talking to him.
And he had gotten word to come.
And one of his neighbors
was also in the hospital.
And he came up and started
talking to my brother and all,
wanting to know what he
was doing at the hospital
and what he was going
to do that weekend.
He said, "Well, it looks
like my sister-in-law
is gonna kick the bucket.
And I was planning
to go to Athens.
But I'll stick around
now to be a pallbearer."
Later I was also
able to talk to him.
He didn't want to
admit it, but he
did admit that this
is what he had said.
And I laughed at him.
Because it embarrassed him.
>>It was amazing that I was
never leaving my body, too.
I was everywhere who
thought about me.
But I was with my body.
It means that I was not leaving
the one part for another.
I was everywhere the same time.
I could be in New York.
I could be in Longview, Texas.
I could be in Moscow.
I could be in Tbilisi,
Georgia-- in any place.
There was no distance and
time at that time with me.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: For me, I went to Asia.
Asia came to me, actually.
You've heard this over and over.
>>MOODY: Oh, over and over.
And people say that
as soon as you're
into this next state of
existence, that time and space
as you and I
appreciate it dissolve,
and there's no such thing.
>>LISA: It so begs the
question of are there
parallel universes?
Is there no time and
space continuum really?
Do we live in a
multiple-dimension reality?
I mean, have you ever
asked these questions?
>>MOODY: I was an
amateur astronomer
since the age of seven.
So yes.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>MOODY: And right now,
in physics, there's
what's called the multiple
worlds interpretation
of quantum theory, which
is-- some theoreticians say
that every decision is--
occurs in all dimensions.
In other words, that when you
make one decision rather than
another, there's
another part of reality
that takes off from that point.
>>LISA: I've heard
that many times, yes.
>>MOODY: And so that
there are multiple worlds
or multiple
dimensions of reality.
>>LISA: So we make
decisions at various times.
And that splits off where
our direction goes in life.
It's fascinating to me.
>>MOODY: Plato made a similar
point in his works, yeah.
>>LISA: So now does everybody go
to this light that you explain?
One of the Facebook
questions is that.
Is seeing the light real?
>>MOODY: I would say this.
I mean, I think
the people who've
had this experience are
better able to talk to it,
talk to the point.
But what they say is that
not only is this light real,
but that it makes
this existence we
have now like a
dream by comparison.
That the reality is not here.
>>LISA: The reality is there.
>>MOODY: The reality
is in this light.
And that constantly
people tell me,
in relating their
near-death experience,
that when they leave
their body and they almost
die, that they feel
like they're waking up.
And that by contrast, this
reality that we're in now
becomes just like a shadow
or unreal or surrealistic.
And that the real world
is on the other side.
>>LISA: It is an
interesting experience.
Because the light, for me,
was-- I was in the light.
It didn't come to me
or I didn't go to it.
I was in that experience.
Have you ever, of course,
been approached about the fact
that this is a lapse
in consciousness,
that this is a physical
byproduct of losing
consciousness?
You've heard this, I'm
sure, a million times.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes, yes.
Although I must say I've
never taken that point of view
seriously.
I should explain that I do have
an MD, and I'm a psychiatrist.
But before that, I got
a PhD In philosophy.
And I was a
philosophy professor.
And one of the oldest
and most difficult
questions of philosophy is what
we call the mind-body problem.
And the real deal is
nobody understands
what the relationship between
that unique inner experience
of self awareness or
consciousness on the one hand,
and on the other hand the
material substance of the body.
We just don't know.
>>LISA: Yet.
>>MOODY: That's right.
But the people who
make this claim
that, oh, these near-death
experiences are just
hallucinatory effect of the
oxygen cut off to the brain,
well there are
several difficulties
with that position.
Number one is that
I don't know anybody
who makes that statement
who's really had experience
interviewing patients.
What they do is
they read something
in a magazine or
a book, and then
they just speculate and put it
together with their ideology.
People who interview
people, who've
interviewed lots of
people, as a general rule,
come to a very different
opinion that this
is something beyond our
current explanatory models.
But I think, more importantly,
that the identical experience
that we call the
near-death experience also
occurs to the bystanders at the
bedside when somebody does die.
>>LISA: The shared death
really does give it
a different perspective.
>>MOODY: That's right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MOODY: And so if the
bystanders, who are not
ill or injured and the
oxygen flow to their brain
is not compromised, and yet they
report the identical experience
to those who are revived
after a close call with death,
then obviously the cause is
not the oxygen deprivation
to the brain.
>>LISA: Well, the
shared death experience
does really kind of
back that up a lot more,
as we just saw on that
clip, with people around,
and the evidence of what's
experienced on the outside.
So when you-- you
had mentioned to me
that there's a new science
that's really emerging that'll
help us understand
this a lot more.
>>MOODY: Yes.
What I am-- by the
way, I am a logician.
I don't like to draw
conclusions, in the sense
that I think-- why hurry?
Right?
And so I am very conservative
in my pronouncements.
But nonetheless, in
the last year or so
I've gotten up to
the point where
I'm completely
confident to say now
that we have made a solid
step of genuine progress
toward rational comprehension
of life after death.
So that what I am saying is
that in the next few years
we're going to have entirely
new, purely, absolutely
rational techniques,
not pseudoscience.
And I should explain to people,
I am not a parapsychologist.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MOODY: Parapsychologists
are people
who are suffering
under the delusion
that you can use scientific
method as we currently
have it to prove the afterlife.
But what I'm saying is
something entirely different--
that we do now have genuine--
>>LISA: Wait.
I'm going to keep on
the edge of your seat.
I'm going to keep you on
Just explain this
in just a second.
We have to take a quick break.
>>MOODY: Great.
>>LISA: When we
come back, I want
to find out about
this new science.
We'll be right back
with Dr. Raymond Moody.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr, and you're
watching "Gaiam Inspirations."
My guest is Dr. Raymond Moody.
We're talking about the
near-death experience
and classic characteristics
of the near-death experience.
And we were speaking
before the break
about the new sciences
that are emerging.
>>MOODY: Yes.
This is very complex,
Lisa, but just
to give you a
thumbnail sketch of it,
we have now techniques
where we can actually
reformat people's minds, for
other reasons than connected
with near-death experiences.
This is a way of increasing
critical thinking skills
and so on.
>>LISA: Through
neurofeedback or--
>>MOODY: Well, it's
basically through exercises
and to sort of eliminate an
incompleteness in Aristotelian
logic.
Aristotle's logic is
built into all of us
because it's been so successful.
But there was an area
where he sort of left out.
Now we've filled this in.
And because of that,
we can help people
get better analytical thinking
skills and many other benefits
by this sort of
reformatting of the mind.
Now, what will happen
is that, once that
happens, and say you have
several thousand people who
are working-- equipped
with a new logic,
in essence, then what's going to
happen with that is that when,
just by chance, in the
future some of them
will have near-death
experiences,
and so they're
going to come back,
and they're not
going to be limited
by this problem of
the indescribability
as the same way.
So in effect, we can
prepare people's minds
to articulate this in
such a way as to bring
us closer to the
experience itself.
And also we can use
this same information
to actually be able to track
people and the dying process
as they go across
to the other side.
And right now this all
sounds pretty incredible.
But stay tuned, because
this is on the way.
>>LISA: This is the
emerging sciences.
>>MOODY: That's right.
>>LISA: This is getting rid
of the old scientific ways
of explaining things into
new realms of thinking.
>>MOODY: Entirely new
realm of thinking.
>>LISA: That's perfect.
All right.
So as we were explaining earlier
about this light that happens,
that people go
through this tunnel
and so forth,
there's another clip
that I want to show
you about the light
that people experience in
going through this near-death
experience.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>They describe to
us how they seem
to be drawn into an
enclosure of some sort.
They often call it a tunnel.
And they go through this
tunnel quite rapidly.
And they come out
of the other side
into an incredibly brilliant
and warm and loving light.
>>Don't know exactly how I
entered the tunnel or just
at what point.
But it was when the
guards had asked me.
And I said yes.
And I feel myself going
in an upward motion.
The tunnel is not too big,
just room for one person
to go one at a time.
It doesn't touch you, or didn't
reach out and touch the walls.
But it's black.
And I feel myself
going up and looking
at light, bright light
at the end of the tunnel.
And the next, as I'm going
along, I see the gray area.
But I did not stop to go in
and see just what was going on.
I went on to come out into this
beautiful pasture, valley land.
Flowers.
Bright, beautiful light.
Brilliant color-- nothing
here is like it at all.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: She's
talking about that as
if it's a present-time
experience, right?
Is that common?
>>MOODY: Yes.
When people are relating a very
vivid and memorable experience,
even if it occurred
to them in the past,
they resort to a
figure of speech
which is called analogy,
which is talking about,
for example, talking
about a past experience
in the present tense.
>>LISA: And so
that's how we know
that she's telling the truth.
>>MOODY: Well, it shows that
she is, even now, after years,
she's experiencing the
vividness of this experience.
>>LISA: So how can
this information
help us, where we go
through tragic disasters
like a tsunami,
or we lose people
in a tragic events like a 9/11.
How does this help us?
>>MOODY: Well, Lisa, one thing
I have observed over the years
that I think is pretty much
clear about these experiences
is that they do
give people comfort
who've lost loved ones to death.
That is the fact.
>>LISA: How?
>>MOODY: Well, first
of all, for many people
this whole idea of an afterlife
is something vague and abstract
that maybe they encounter
in their religious belief,
but it's not filled out.
But this, from people
who actually got there
to the cusp of the other world
and are able to talk about even
then they felt great, and
there was this love and so on.
And that is a very
comforting message
to people who've
lost loved ones.
That said, I must go on
to say that, you know,
even people who've had profound
near-death experiences, they
say that when they lose
a loved one to death,
they still miss them.
>>LISA: Well, of course.
Yes.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
But it does give, I
think, people a comfort
to realize that in the future
they're going to be reunited
with their loved ones
they lost to death.
>>LISA: And you hear that,
that they're in a better place.
You've heard that
phrase many times.
Well, this is maybe
the example of that.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: All right.
Here's another clip from
the movie "Life After Life"
about being in
that better place.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>If you imagine this
panorama of your life
as like a still pond, and
each action in your life
is like a pebble which
you flip into that pond.
At the point where that
pebble impacts on the surface,
you see ripples going out.
>>Right.
>>But he said that as these
ripples and this panorama
impinge on others, then you can
see the secondary effects going
off from those people
in the form of ripples.
>>I see.
>>So I think it
illustrates how tied in we
all are to one another in
this life, how profoundly
our actions and our
feelings affect others.
And of course, in this life
review we're made aware of that
in a very profound way.
>>Yeah.
>>And people say, too, that
it's not the events in your life
that you would necessarily
expect which get reviewed.
It's not the big
accomplishments, but rather
the simple acts of
kindness, often things
that you would even
have forgotten.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Have you ever
heard the same type
of experience of
someone who has--
like that commit suicide
and comes back from that.
>>Thank you for that question.
We-- studies have shown that
the near-death experiences
of suicide attempters are no
different from those of people
who come close to death
from other causes.
But in the studies
that were done of this,
they interviewed
all the patients
who came into the hospital
over a period of time
who had attempted
to kill themselves,
almost died as a
result, but survived it.
And they interviewed them.
And they found that some
did and some did not
have a near-death experience.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MOODY: Then following
these two groups of patients
afterward, they found a
remarkable occurrence.
And that is that while
the patients who did not
have a near-death
experience continued
to have a high rate
of subsequent attempts
to kill themselves,
the patients who did
have a near-death experience
had an essentially zero rate
of any further attempts
to kill themselves.
And when interviewed
about this, what they said
was not that they felt that,
had this gone to completion,
they would have ended
up in a terrible hell,
but rather, that they
learned from their experience
that even when times are
tough, life has a purpose.
And also they realized that,
had this gone to completion,
they would have had to
have seen, empathically,
the after effects of this, that
they would have experienced
the pain and hurt
that they had brought
about in the lives of
those who they left behind.
>>LISA: Through the ripple
effect in that panoramic life
review.
So now, in the same sense, if
someone was, say, in a coma,
could the people
around them that
love them, like children
or other loved ones,
hold them back and keep them
into this life with intention,
with will?
Have you ever seen that?
>>MOODY: Well, you
know, actually, I've
heard a few people
over the years
tell me that, yes, that they
did feel that they were brought
back by the prayers
of their loved ones.
Or sometimes when
they're given a choice,
they can either go
on in this light
or they can go back to the
life they've been leading.
They choose to come back not
because that's what they want.
They say, for themselves,
they would rather
have stayed in the
light, but they
choose to come back on the
behalf of other people.
Like they say they chose to come
back because, most commonly,
because they have small
children left to raise.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Someone from Facebook
is saying, Dee,
his uncle has passed several
times-- no, has already passed.
And she had three consecutive
dreams of him and his death.
Did Dee cause this?
And why does this happen?
>>MOODY: Well, Dee, I don't
know exactly why it happens,
but I do know this-- that
the experience you're
relating there is
just very common.
That it's a very
common phenomenon
that within a certain period of
time after the death of a loved
one, that people
will have what are
called apparitional experiences.
And these occur in
three circumstances.
One, as in the description
you're giving there, a dream.
Now, often-- I don't
know about your case,
but very often people
tell me that they
have to call it a dream
because they were asleep.
But it didn't seem like a dream.
It had the quality of reality.
Another kind of common
locale for apparitions
is people will say that as
they're in the bed at night
and they're still
awake, but they
see the apparition of
the deceased person
there at their bedside.
And then the third
group are people
who say that in the middle
of the day, when they're
fully conscious and
in waking awareness,
that they have apparitions
of the deceased.
So the experience
you're describing
is something that
literally goes back--
there are descriptions of this
even going back to antiquity.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MOODY: Oh, yes.
This is part and parcel
of being a human being.
>>LISA: The same thing
happened to me, Dee.
Before my husband's
grandfather passed.
We were driving away
from the hospital,
and he was still alive.
And I said, I'll be right back.
And I fell into this deep--
>>MOODY: Trance
>>LISA: --trance.
And he came really clearly to me
and said, I'm going to go now.
And I woke up.
And I said, I have a message
for you, to my husband.
And he's driving, thinking,
what just happened?
And then he passed
several days out.
So you've heard this.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: Oh, you're kidding.
>>MOODY: You know, these
shared death experiences don't
happen-- they don't
have to happen
right there at the bedside.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MOODY: I've had
many cases where
people would say that
even across the city
or across the state or in
another part of the country,
that the moment their loved
one died in some other place,
they will realize that.
And then a while later
they get the phone
call that it had happened.
>>LISA: Carina is asking--
Carina from Facebook--
and thanks for your comments
coming in, by the way.
She had a similar--
she wants to find out
if there's something similar
between a near-death experience
and passing out from pain.
She had an unusual experience
where she passed out
from a ruptured appendix.
>>MOODY: Yes, Carina.
What I think is going on here
is there's a kind of continuum.
And I mean a
ruptured appendix-- I
don't know what your doctors
might have told you about that,
but that's a
dangerous situation.
And you were in very grave
states at that point.
So you know, this
is a continuum.
And people who, as the
call is-- the closer you
get to this death, the
more elements of these
that you have.
So yeah.
There's kind of continuum.
So that people who are in severe
states, as you're describing,
can have parts of this
near-death experience.
>>LISA: Interesting.
All right.
Well, there's an
overarching theme here.
And basically it's--
what is this teaching us?
What is the purpose of these
experiences and sharing them
with other people?
What is this?
>>MOODY: Everybody that
I know who comes back
from one of these
very transcendent
near-death experiences, whatever
they happened to be chasing
in life, I mean, as a
psychiatrist and a person,
I know that most people
are chasing something.
>>LISA: The dream.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
Like me, it's knowledge.
Some people chase
power or fame or money
or any of these other things.
But when people come
back from this, whatever
they were chasing,
they say what this
is all about is
learning to love.
Because they say that's
what came up in this review
is that the most important thing
we can do while we're alive
is to learn how to love,
which is not an easy task.
>>LISA: Well, it shows it very
clearly in the movie "Life
After Life," of explanations
of what people got back
from their near-death
experiences.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>It's so touching to
me that in the closing
moments of their life, that
so many people come back
reporting that what was most
important to them at this time
was love, the
question of how they
had loved their
fellow human beings.
>>It had a lot of effects
in changing my life.
It's made me a more
understanding person of others.
I know I don't have the
right to take my life.
I didn't want to return.
And I would love to go back.
Someday I will.
And then I hopefully can stay
and not have to come back
and try again.
But I know I cannot take
my life and go there.
Things would not work out right.
But I think I'm a better
person about watching
for the needs of others and
not being always selfish.
Oh, I'm still selfish.
I'm still a human.
But it has changed
my way of thinking.
>>How to love other
people and how
to-- how to forgive
and to put yourself
in the place of other people
in order to understand them.
And that's something
that you have
to do in order to love people
and in order to love yourself.
Because if you hold grudges
and you-- it hurts you.
And it hurts the other people.
And it's a barrier to
love if you can't forgive.
You don't necessarily have to
forget when people hurt you,
but you have to understand
them and forgive them.
And I think that that is the
most important thing about love
that I've learned.
And how to look
at how we're alike
rather than how we're different.
>>This is the main message
which I brought back,
that love is what
cannot be changed.
This is everlasting.
And love is with
life always together.
Love-- what keeps
this world alive.
Love as an eternity.
Love as a basic of humankind.
And we are alive
because of love.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Yes.
And if we could all
bring that experience
into our current
waking reality--
that's what happened
to me when I came back
from that experience.
And when I did come back
in, and after several months
of severe memory
loss, I realized
that the man that
was there to help me
was the man I had broken up with
before I had this experience
and then now is the
man I'm married to.
So it is about love.
And ultimately,
all is about love.
But how does that help someone
who has lost someone they love?
>>MOODY: Well, again, what
I think is that it's-- that
you're always going to
miss the person who died.
But to me it's very
comforting to know that,
as based on literally
thousands upon thousands
upon thousands of cases, that
what people say is that you do
see them again.
>>LISA: Yeah, that
is very comforting.
Even-- actually, Diane's
asking, what about pets?
Do you see them?
Have you ever heard anything?
>>MOODY: Well, you know,
Diane, not many cases
of near-death experiences
have I interviewed
where the people did
see a deceased pet.
However, there have been some.
And-- now, this part is just
a conjecture and an intuition.
But I have a sense that
probably that part of it
is under reported.
And the reason is that, in
my grief counseling practice,
I see people who are
there because they're
grieving the loss of a pet.
And so I know how powerful
an experience that is.
And also, people
in that situation
generally tell me that they
feel embarrassed because they're
afraid to talk about
their family with this.
They don't think
their family will
be understanding, that it's
a sign of weakness, blah,
blah, blah, all those things.
>>LISA: No, I've heard
that the loss of a pet is--
>>MOODY: Yes, it absolutely is.
>>MOODY: --almost as bad
as the loss of a loved one.
Or it will reignite the
pain of a lost loved one.
>>MOODY: It does.
And so what I would say in
answer to Diane's question
is that I don't know
many cases of that,
but I think there are
probably many more.
And I think that
probably that that
is something that would be
too personal for many people
to relate.
>>LISA: Well, I'm sure.
And it's definitely because
the animals themselves
are so unconditionally loving.
It does fit right
into that concept
of the overarching theme
here, which is love.
Love is experienced on the other
side that you've heard about.
It teaches us back
into this reality
that love is the
most important thing.
As you said to me when I
very first spoke to you,
love is the most
important thing.
And it's beautifully said.
>>MOODY: Well, it really is.
>>LISA: It is.
Another one of our
Facebook questions
coming in from Robbie.
After near-death
experience, are people
more psychic or intuitive?
Have you ever heard that from
the cases that you've studied?
>>MOODY: Well,
thank you, Robbie.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's a great question.
>>MOODY: And you know,
this is something
I began to see from
the very beginning.
I remember a wonderful
woman who was
the receptionist of a medical
doctor in Macon, Georgia.
My dad was a doctor there.
And one of his fellow
physicians, his receptionist
had had this experience.
And she talked with me
about this, Mrs. Stokes.
And what she told me was that,
yes, that after her experience,
she found, for
example, that when
she would go into the
elevator with people,
that she would have
this way of picking up
on what people were thinking
or what their troubles were,
and so on.
And exactly how to
account for that,
I don't know, except to say
that this experience really
does break down
people's ego boundaries.
It's like they become
different people.
And I think that
it makes them more
attuned to the
feeling of others.
>>LISA: It breaks down
many different constructs
of reality, including
fear of death.
>>MOODY: Including
And also including the whole
notion of space and time.
People say that,
in this experience,
space and time as you and
I appreciate it now just
fail to exist.
They're not a factor anymore.
>>LISA: I really
want to mention,
and I want to make sure that
I'm clear about the fact
that I don't want to speak about
death being a trivial thing.
Death is a very
honorable transition.
>>MOODY: Yes.
>>LISA: And people have
many different senses of it.
It's the number one
fear of Americans.
It is also a lot
about the unknown.
And so I want to make
sure people understand
the conversation we're having
completely, fully honors
the experience.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: And anyone who's
had the experience,
of a near-death experience
or the loss of a loved one,
I definitely want to mention
that this is to be honored.
This is about education.
>>MOODY: You know that death
is the ultimate seriousness
in a way.
I mean, this is not
something to trivialize.
>>LISA: No, it
absolutely is not.
>>MOODY: These are the
worst and most painful
feelings of all,
are the feelings
of the loss of a loved one.
>>LISA: That people have
tried to explain and heal
from for thousands and thousands
of years, since-- as you say,
in antiquity.
There's a great clip that-- in
the movie "Life After Life,"
which is a Gaiam
movie, by the way, that
explains how the fear
of death goes away
after this experience from these
people that are interviewed.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>And also they tell us
that their fear of death
is totally gone
after this, that they
have no more fear
of death whatsoever.
>>I saw life as an infinite
life, infinite light,
as an everlasting being.
We cannot die because we are
already created for to live
forever.
The dimension of spirit
is everlasting life.
>>The third thing
that I have learned
is that life is forever.
Death is nothing more
or less than a doorway,
something you walk through.
>>Death does not exist.
Don't be afraid.
Death is only the part as a
station, railroad station,
where you come always
to go to another life.
>>I find it very
comforting and encouraging
to hear from so many people
who have explored life
beyond physical death
that life goes on.
So I know it's true if
either of us went tomorrow,
we'd be joined again in what
must seem like an instant.
Back in a flash,
as you always say.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: It is my hope
that this show here
is a healing for people.
And your work as well has
been an enormous healing
for people to not only
explain if they've
been through this experience,
which I was very lost before.
I didn't pay attention
to it at all.
I wanted to deny that that ever
happened to me until I became
familiar with your definitions.
And it gave me a doorway into
a sense of belonging, I guess.
But you have helped
so many people.
And so what is it that you
hope to leave as a legacy,
if you will, with your work?
>>MOODY: Well, I'm very
happy to have played
a part in the reemergence of the
study of near-death experiences
and to Western traditions,
because actually,
that's how the Western
traditions began.
Plato and the early
Greek philosophers
were fascinated by
this, as we are today.
So that, too.
But I think that also, in
terms of professional things,
that what I'm going to be more
remembered for is probably
my work in conceptualizing
new ways of thinking,
what you might
broadly call logic.
Because I was a
professor of logic.
And that is my sort
of underlying work.
And then in terms of
my personal life, what
I hope to be remembered
as is a wonderful father
to my children and my--
>>LISA: Grandchildren.
>>MOODY: Grandchild, yes.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
And what is it that you
would like them to learn?
>>MOODY: Well, you know, it's
like you want your children
to be safe and happy.
And it's like I don't
have an agenda for them.
I just hope they find a happy
way of life and something
they really love
and enjoy doing.
>>LISA: Do your
young children know
that you talk about
life after life?
>>MOODY: Well, just recently,
just in the last few months
they've kind of woken up to it.
I have a very brilliant
11-year-old Blackfeet Indian
daughter who was reading even
before she went to school.
And she recently has
apparently read some of this.
So she's very
interested in it now.
And that's just very recent.
>>LISA: Well, I just want
to say thank you so much
for the work that
you've done in the world
and for the people that you've
helped and for the people
that you've helped look at
grief in a different way
and to heal from that.
So thank you so much.
>>MOODY: Thank you, Kim.
>>LISA: Lisa.
>>MOODY: Lisa.
Because you remind
me of my friend Kim.
>>LISA: Oh, I do?
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Well, maybe we were
in another life together.
>>MOODY: Well, it could be.
But I know full well
that you're Lisa.
>>LISA: Yes.
Thank you so much.
And if you want to see a longer
interview with Dr. Moody and I,
you can go to
gaiamtv.com for more
thought-provoking interviews.
And also there's inspirational
films and so much more there.
And you can sign up for a free
trial of gaiamtv.com today
by going to GaiamTV.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]